machine problem 1
The area of a rectangle is the rectangle’s length times its width. Write a program that asks 
for the length and width of two rectangles. The program should tell the user which rectan
gle has the greater area, or if the areas are the same.

machine problem 2
Quarter of the Year
 Write a program that asks the user for a month as a number between 1 and 12. The 
program should display a message indicating whether the month is in the first quarter, 
the second quarter, the third quarter, or the fourth quarter of the year. Following are the 
guidelines:
 •	If the user enters	either	1,	2, or 3, the month	is in the first	quarter.
 •	If the user enters	a number between 4 and 6, the month is in the second quarter.
 •	If the number is either 7, 8, or 9, the month is in the third quarter.
 •	If the month is between 10	and	12,	the	month is in	the	fourth quarter.
 •	If the number is not between 1 and	12,	the	program	should display an error.

machine problem 3
 Mass and Weight
 Scientists measure an object’s mass in kilograms and its weight in newtons. If you know 
the amount of mass of an object in kilograms, you can calculate its weight in newtons with 
the following formula:
 weight =  mass x 9.8
 Write a program that asks the user to enter an object’s mass, then calculates its weight. If 
the object weighs more than 500 newtons, display a message indicating that it is too heavy. 
If the object weighs less than 100 newtons, display a message indicating that it is too light

machine problem 4
Book Club Points
Serendipity Booksellers has a book club that awards points to its customers based on the 
number of books purchased each month. The points are awarded as follows:
 •	If a customer purchases	0 books, he	or she earns 0 points.
 •	If a customer purchases 2 books, he or she earns 5 points.
 •	If a customer purchases 4 books, he or she earns 15 points.
 •	If a customer purchases 6 books, he or she earns 30 points.
 •	If a customer purchases 8 or more books, he or she earns 60 points.
 Write a program that asks the user to enter the number of books that he or she has pur
chased this month, then displays the number of points awarded.

machine problem 5
Calories Burned
 Running on a particular treadmill you burn 4.2 calories per minute. Write a program that 
uses a loop to display the number of calories burned after 10, 15, 20, 25, and 30 minutes.
